---
layout: page
title: "Educational leadership"
permalink: /education/
nav_order: 6
---
 
I aim to foster a creative and inclusive research and teaching
environment by being open-minded and approachable in order to create a
space where diverse perspectives are valued and innovative ideas
flourish. I try to be understanding of the challenges of research and
learning in the hopes of offering guidance through clear communication
and mentorship. I am strongly committed to inclusivity and diversity,
and I prioritize the well-being of students.


**Teaching**

Here I highlight workshops which I have taught that demonstrate my
expertise in theory and quantitative methods used in evolutionary
ecology.

-   1\) **Mixed Effect Models in Ecology and Evolution**. UC Davis, USA
    2023; CEFE, Montpellier, France, 2018^\*^ & 2022; NTNU, Trondheim,
    Norway, 2017^\*^ & 2022^\*^; U. Melbourne, Australia, 2015^\*^; Max
    Planck, Germany, 2014^\*^.

    \*Main teacher of the workshop

-   2\) **The Hierarchical Nature of Life History Evolution in Natural
    Populations**. "Advanced school in Life history theory". University
    of Costa Rica, San José, Costa Rica, 2016 & 2017^\*^. University of
    Groningen, the Netherlands, 2018^\*^.

    \*Main teacher, invited teacher of an advanced school

-   3\) **Statistical Approaches to Multivariate Phenotypes**^\*^, Max
    Planck Institute and Centre for Biodiversity Dynamics,
    Germany-Norway.

    \*Main teacher

-   4\) **Behavioural Ecology meets Quantitative Genetics**^\*^,
    Ludwig-Maximilians University of Munich, LMU, Germany, 2013-2014.

    \* Main teacher for a university course

-   5\) **Tropical Ecology**^\*^, Council for International Exchange
    Education, USA-Costa Rica 2008-2010.

    \*Teaching assistant for semester abroad program
    
    
**Mentoring**

I am currently the main supervisor of two PhD students. Myranda Murray
started working in 2021 on the project \"Social Evolution and its
Consequences for Population Persistence in a Changing World. She has
already published the paper:

Murray M.^\*^, Wright, J., **Araya-Ajoy Y.G.** Evolutionary rescue from
climate change: male indirect genetic effects on lay-dates and their
consequences for population persistence, [[Evolution letters,
2023]{.underline}](https://doi.org/10.1093/evlett/qrad022)

Tor Hansson Frank started in 2022 working on the project
\"Density-dependent Competition and its Consequences on the
Eco-Evolutionary Dynamics of Small Fragmented Populations\".

I am also co-supervising Jørgen Søraker, who just started his PhD at the
University of Oxford in the Department of Zoology. Previously, he was my
Master's student and his thesis is in review in the Journal of
Evolutionary Biology.
    
    
