---
layout: page
title: "About Me"
permalink:
---

<div style="display: flex; align-items: center;">
  <img src="/assets/images/Pic.jpg" alt="Description" style="width: 30%; margin-right: 20px;">
  <p>
 I am a researcher in the Norwegian University of Science and Technology.
 </p>
</div>


My research has addressed fundamental evolutionary questions through an
integrative approach that bridges behavioral ecology, quantitative
genetics, and population ecology. Over the course of my career, I have
contributed to empirical, methodological, and theoretical advancements
in evolutionary ecology. This has resulted in 53 peer-reviewed
publications, attracting over 3,300 citations, with both publication and
citation rates continuing to rise
([](https://scholar.google.com/citations?hl=en&user=q4pwMVIAAAAJ)). I
have secured over \$1 million in funding as PI and Co-PI and worked on
diverse study systems across tropical, temperate, and Arctic regions. If
given the opportunity, I expect to keep producing high-quality research
at Upssala University using the feedback between statistics, theory and
fieldwork as the core of my work.

I obtained my master's degree from the University of Costa Rica, where
pursuing research required me to independently secure funding for my
work. I successfully obtained grants from the Costa Rican National
Council for Scientific and Technological Research, the Organization for
Tropical Studies, and the U.S. National Science Foundation. My research
on the social behavior of Ocellated Antbirds culminated in two
peer-reviewed publications
\[[1,](https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2009.0730)
[2](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0008137)\], contributing
valuable insights into tropical avian social systems and demonstrating
my early commitment to advancing ecological research. I graduated with
honours from my master's program and, after gaining experience as an
academic and field assistant for various projects and institutions,
joined the Max Planck Institute for Ornithology (MPIO) as a PhD student.
I was selected from a highly competitive, global applicant pool to join
the International Max Planck Research School of Organismal Biology, with
funding from the MPIO and a PhD grant awarded by the German Academic
Exchange Service.

During my PhD, I investigated the genetic and behavioral mechanisms
driving mating strategies in German Great Tits (*Parus major*),
integrating behavioral ecology and quantitative genetics. I used
structural equation models to characterize the multivariate, multi-level
nature of aggressiveness and its fitness effects
\[[3](https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2013.2645),
[4](https://doi.org/10.1111/evo.13024)\], developed methods to estimate
the repeatability and heritability of behavioral plasticity
\[[5](https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210X.12430),
[6](https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2656.12621)\], and applied the indirect
genetic effects framework to study how social environments influence
behavior and fitness \[[4](https://doi.org/10.1111/evo.13024),
[7](https://www.cell.com/trends/ecology-evolution/abstract/S0169-5347(14)00263-8)\].
One paper earned the Pitelka Award for academic excellence from the
International Society of Behavioral Ecology
\[[8](https://doi.org/10.1093/beheco/arv187)\], and six of my PhD
publications (defended in 2015) have each been cited over 100 times
\[[3](https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2013.2645),
[5](https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210X.12430),
[6](https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2656.12621),
[7](https://www.cell.com/trends/ecology-evolution/abstract/S0169-5347(14)00263-8),
[9](https://doi.org/10.1093/beheco/art035),
[10](https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2013.1019)\], reflecting the impact of
my work. I graduated with honours from my PhD and proceeded to work as
postdoc at MPIO, where I advanced my expertise in applied statistics,
particularly in using simulations to enhance statistical inference. I
co-founded an international research network
([SQuID](http://squidgroup.org/about/)) focused on using simulations to
understand how mixed-effect models help elucidate the causes and
consequences of the hierarchical structuring of biological variation.
This collaboration has since produced several R packages and
peer-reviewed articles \[[11](https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210X.12659),
[12](https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2656.13360),
[13](https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210X.13434),
[14](https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210X.14200)\].

For my second postdoc, I joined the Centre for Biodiversity Dynamics at
the Norwegian University of Science and Technology to integrate
theoretical modeling and expand my focus to evolutionary demography. The
Centre fostered interdisciplinary collaboration between mathematicians,
statisticians, and biologists, bridging empirical research on wild
populations with theoretical modeling through advanced statistical
analyses. My project aimed to understand how evolutionary processes
shape population demography, specifically whether differences among
populations result from selective pressures on individuals. The study
system was a Norwegian meta-population of house sparrows (*Passer
domesticus*) where individual life histories have been monitored since 1998. 
I developed individual-level metrics for life histories, such as
generation time, and estimated their heritability to assess evolutionary
potential
\[[15](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00265-018-2477-7),
[16](https://doi.org/10.1111/ele.13835)\]. I also explored how
density-dependent competition, influenced the demographic contributions
of individuals with different life histories causing differences between
populations in their life-histories
\[[16](https://doi.org/10.1111/ele.13835)\]. Concurrently, I advanced
the integration of behavioral ecology and quantitative genetics by
developing theoretical models to examine how frequency-dependence from
game theory affects selection responses and population dynamics
\[[17](https://doi.org/10.1111/evo.14058),
[18]( https://doi.org/10.1111/evo.14058)\] and expanded quantitative
genetic models to study selection on the multi-leve expression of
behavioral phenotypes \[[19](https://doi.org/10.1093/evolut/qpad136),
[20](https://doi.org/10.1111/evo.14198)\]. These interdisciplinary
efforts laid the foundation for my current work, where I apply
quantitative genetic frameworks to investigate how social interactions
drive the eco-evolutionary dynamics of natural populations and how
social behaviors affect their capacity to adapt to environmental change.

In 2021, I was awarded a Young Talented Researchers grant from the
Norwegian Research Council
([NFR](https://www.forskningsradet.no/en/call-for-proposals/2023/researcher-project-young-talents-fripro/))
to investigate the role of social interactions in eco-evolutionary
dynamics. That same year, I was selected for the Outstanding Academic
Fellows Program
([OAFP](https://www.ntnu.edu/outstanding-academic-fellows-programme/2022-2026))
at NTNU, which recognizes and supports researchers with a strong record
of international excellence. My current research, funded by both NFR and
NTNU, focuses on the social environment---defined by the density and
phenotypes of interacting individuals---as a central concept linking
ecological and evolutionary processes. By examining how the social
environment influences phenotypic expression, selection, and population
growth, we aim to deepen our understanding of the feedbacks between
population dynamics and evolutionary change. This grant has enabled me
to establish a dynamic research group, including the recruitment of two
PhD students. One of them has led theoretical work that explicitly
models the effects of social interactions on species' susceptibility to
climate change using evolutionary rescue frameworks
\[[21](https://doi.org/10.1093/evlett/qrad022)\]. Our group is now
uniquely positioned to advance this field, combining robust analytical
frameworks that dissect how frequency- and density-dependent selection
shape eco-evolutionary dynamics
\[[22](https://doi.org/10.32942/X27P5K)\] with a unique a long-term
dataset on individual life histories of house sparrows where we have
been unraveling the genetic and environmental drivers of morphological
divergence \[[23](https://doi.org/10.1111/evo.13668)\], dispersal
\[[24]( https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2656.13580)\], and fitness
\[[16](https://doi.org/10.1111/ele.13835), [25].

While much of this research is ongoing, we have already begun extending
our findings to explore how social interactions modulate the effects of
stochasticity on population vulnerability to climate change [25]. 
This integrative approach positions our work at the forefront 
of eco-evolutionary research, with implications for understanding species 
resilience in rapidly changing environments.

