---
layout: page
title: "Research vision"
permalink: \ResearchVision\
---

## A general view 

My research focuses on developing general frameworks that are adaptable
to specific study systems, ensuring broad theoretical insights have
practical applications. I am committed to open science, prioritizing
transparency, inclusivity, and equitable access to resources. To support
this, I preferentially publish in society-run journals that reinvest
profits into the scientific community and rely on open-source software
to enhance reproducibility and accessibility. Through international
collaborations, innovative methodologies, and knowledge-sharing
initiatives, I aim to advance fundamental research while ensuring its
broad applicability and impact.

My research integrates empirical, methodological, and theoretical
advancements in evolutionary ecology. Grounded in robust theoretical
frameworks my work combines analytical theory, individual-based and
statistical simulations, with detailed analyses of long-term
individual-based data using flexible programming languages like R and
Stan. This diverse toolkit not only strengthens research but also
enhances my teaching portfolio.

## The Challenge and the Knowledge Gaps

Habitats are increasingly being lost and fragmented, and the climate is
changing at unprecedented rates. Predicting population responses to
these environmental changes is one of the most pressing challenges in
biology. Addressing this challenge requires a deep understanding of the
demographic consequences of gene-environment interactions and how these
are modulated by behavioral plasticity.

Evolutionary biology has developed powerful theoretical and quantitative
tools to study adaptation, yet a lack of integration across ecological
and evolutionary disciplines limits our understanding of how phenotypic
evolution affects population dynamics. My research aims to bridge this
gap by integrating behavioral ecology, quantitative genetics, and
evolutionary demography exploiting their complementary perspectives on
adaptation. By synthesizing optimality theory from behavioral ecology,
quantitative genetic models of evolutionary responses to selection, and
projection techniques from evolutionary demography, I am uniquely
positioned to advance our understanding of eco-evolutionary dynamics in
changing environments. Here, I will detail how my research has aimed at
integrating these fields and how, through working at their interface, I
have identified emerging research areas that form the basis of my
current and future research agenda.

## Socio-Eco-Evo Dynamics

The realization that evolutionary change can affect ecological and
demographic processes relatively fast and determine populations' ability
to cope with rapid environmental change has led to an increase in
studies on the feedback between ecology and evolution (eco-evolutionary
dynamics). Surprisingly, even though competition, cooperation and sexual
reproduction are key processes determining population dynamics and
phenotypic evolution, classic theory on the evolution of social behavior
has not been fully integrated within the eco-evolutionary dynamics
paradigm.

Since my PhD, I have contributed to integrating behavioral ecology and
quantitative genetics to study evolution in a social context. Based on
this work, I identified key assumptions of quantitative genetic models
that precluded studying its consequences on population dynamics. As part
of my postdoctoral work I thus combined quantitative genetics models of
social evolution with evolutionary demography to address this gap. This
work laid the foundation for my current work aiming to understand how
phenotypic evolution affects population growth rates, and how these
changes can feeback to modify selection pressures through its effects on
competitive regimes (eco-evolutionary feedabacks). My current work is
funded on a young research talent grant from NFR, that is aimed to
understand the social factors that shape the eco-evolutionary dynamics
of populations and its long term persistence.

The next step in this research line, spanning the next two to three
years, is to connect social eco-evolutionary with stochastic population
dynamic models. Stochastic population models focus on how environmental
fluctuations causing covariance in the fitness of individuals will
affect the evolutionary dynamics of populations and their carrying
capacity. A key insight from embedding social evolution within this
framework is that strategies that are evolutionarily stable may not be
ecologically stable in a stochastic environment. This is particularly
important for small fragmented populations increasingly exposed to
unpredictable climatic effects. Using a combination of theoretical
modelling and state-of-the-art statistical analyses of long-term data on
wild bird populations, this research focus will provide key insights
into the role of social behavior on eco-evolutionary dynamics in
stochastic environments.

In four to five years, I aim to extend this framework to conduct
comparative analysis using long-term publicly available data sets of
European birds' breeding ecology ([SPI birds](https://spibirds.org/en)).
This may provide insights into how the resilience of communities depends
on the social dynamics of the species most affected by climate change.
Furthermore, human societies represent one of the most critical
environmental drivers for natural populations. Game theory models,
addressing problems like the tragedy of the commons, have been used to
study the management of natural resources and conservation policies.
Further integration of social evolution, evolutionary demography and
stochastic population dynamics will allow deriving general principles to
understand natural populations but may also help guide the development
of environmental policy.

## Eco-evolutionary dynamics of variation 

My next long-term research direction stems from working at the interface
of population ecology, quantitative genetics, and behavioral ecology.
Through this work, I have come to recognize that these disciplines often
take distinct and somewhat disconnected approaches to studying the
consequences of phenotypic variation. Phenotypic variation is
hierarchically structured---it occurs within individuals across years,
among individuals within populations, among populations within species,
and among species within communities. Developing a unified framework to
study multi-level phenotypic variation is essential for understanding
how diversity shapes the eco-evolutionary dynamics of populations and
ecosystems. Eco-evolutionary feedbacks emerge from interactions across
these hierarchical levels, yet different subfields of evolutionary
ecology tend to focus on specific levels in isolation. Addressing this
challenge requires integrating insights from across these disciplines.
My expertise in developing and applying hierarchical modeling positions
me strongly to tackle these questions, as it provides a rigorous
framework for quantifying phenotypic variation at multiple levels and
linking it to ecological and evolutionary processes. My previous work
has successfully bridged such gaps, demonstrating my ability to address
complex interdisciplinary questions. Building on this foundation, and
with the support of outstanding academic fellows at NTNU, I am currently
developing a European Research Council (ERC) grant proposal on the
eco-evolutionary dynamics of phenotypic variation.

## Towards a more integrative evolutionary ecology 
An overarching goal of my research is to advance a more integrative
approach to evolutionary ecology. By working at the interface of
behavioral ecology, quantitative genetics, and evolutionary demography,
I aim to bridge disciplinary gaps and develop a comprehensive
understanding of eco-evolutionary dynamics. Addressing the challenges
posed by rapid environmental change requires international
collaboration, as ecological and evolutionary processes operate across
broad spatial and temporal scales. My research is embedded within a
global network of collaborators, allowing me to integrate diverse study
systems and methodological approaches to generate broadly applicable
insights. I am excited about the opportunity to bring this research
agenda to Uppsala University, contributing to its strong tradition of
evolutionary ecology while fostering international partnerships that are
essential for tackling pressing global challenges.
